finally some good news it's not all you
when you're grumpy unable to concentrate
tired in the mornings or evenings
yet somehow you still have your eyes
wide open when you try to fall asleep at
some normal time
yes all that it's not your fault
even more when you want to throw your
alarm clock through the window in the
morning
don't feel productive at all or can't
explain why you're never fully rested
well the reason you feel this way could
be
because you're living on the wrong side
of the time zone
time zones haven't always been there our
ancestors adjusted their clocks by
tracking the position of the sun
solar noon is when the sun is at the
highest point in the sky
communities all over the world would
simply wait for the sun to go up
and then set their clocks to noon of
course
that way everyone had their own system
and time
because the sun couldn't be everywhere
at once
so when there was noon in new york city
washington dc was still a minute behind
waiting for its clock to tick on 12 pm
sounds like a mess now but it really
wasn't that big of a deal back then
in those times people would travel from
one point to another
on foot or by wagon or horses and
couldn't reach destinations far
enough to become aware of the time zones
but
the 19th century came and railroads were
invented
say hello to distant traveling and it
was then
that it all actually turned into a
complete mess
each train station had its own time so
setting the schedule that would work in
two towns
even when the distance was only a
hundred miles was mission
impossible back then the us had more
than 300 local sun times
after plenty of years of negotiating
tada
the first four time zones were there in
the next 50 years
most of the world's countries thought
about it and in the end
decided to go for a system of
international time zones
to be precise 24 of them
they even convened a meeting and decided
greenwich
which is in england is the zero point of
time zones
so when you go eastward time goes back
by one hour for each zone
and if you move west you get an extra
hour per zone
making a time zone map was sort of a
compromise
between making a time schedule around
solar noons
and bluntly standardizing universal time
that meant no more checking your watch
and guessing
what time it could be in the city you're
about to arrive in
for around a century and a half things
were well
good but not long ago a group of
scientists gathered and made research
that showed
time zones are maybe not such a good
solution
especially when it comes to our health
we were here
long before clocks and time zones which
is why we have our own
time navigation system biological clock
yep it dates from those cave times when
a regular schedule for humans
looked something like this one get up
with the first rays of the sun
two catch something for lunch three
yeah uh try not to be eaten while
outside
four try that cool thing with two rocks
and weird sparks once again
maybe something can really happen this
time
five whoops sun's gone getting dark
gotta go bye electricity
agriculture and civilization in general
gave us a completely new lifestyle
but still our biological clock is
somewhere in there
ticking next to the rhythm of the sun
and reminding us of those good old times
with time zones in place some people
more or less manage to catch up with the
rhythm of the sun
but others have to get up when it's
still dark outside
take two cities on the opposite sides of
the central time zone
in nashville tennessee the sun will
start to come up
at 6 30 while it's 7 30 in amarillo
texas
time zones are really wide so living on
the western edge of one of them
means you have a later sunrise but
people from both sides still have to get
up at 6am to get to work
and there's sunset too when it's 8 p.m
in nashville
it's around 9 00 pm in amarillo so
people there get to enjoy the sunlight a
little bit longer
when we see the natural light is fading
our body starts producing a hormone
called melatonin
it's the one making you feel sleepy and
desperate for a good rest
scientists discovered that those living
on the western side
with a later sunset go to bed around 19
minutes later
not much at first but when you think
about it it's 115 hours of sleep you
lose
over just one year no wonder you feel so
exhausted
the research also said that people on
the western side
struggle more with health issues and
stress
even the wages of people are around
three percent lower
since being on the wrong side also has
negative effects on productivity
oh man it's such a release to finally
blame my empty wallet on someone
or rather something now where was i with
that amazon cart
people from those areas mostly rely on
artificial light
which is not following our biological
clock and
by that can seriously disrupt our inner
rhythm
jet lag is something you go through when
traveling from one time zone to another
when the difference is seven or eight
hours it can take a couple of days to
feel like yourself once again
you just wander around like a zombie
can't fall asleep at some normal time
and can't even function during the day
well
there's also this thing called social
jet lag
it's not when you stay up all night
scrolling through the facebook feed
that one's actually on you we can't
blame everything on the sun
this is an actual term that describes a
sleep schedule that's out of rhythm
in the end it makes you feel irritable
tired all the time
grumpy and unable to concentrate so
if you live on the western side of a
time zone you probably struggle with
social jet lag
and if you use electronic devices and
rely on electric lights
more than your body really needs the lag
will get even more serious
to sum it up jet lag is when you go from
one place to another
and that way mess up your biological
rhythm and social jetlag
is the disruption you have while being
in the same place
now tomorrow when you wake up feeling
like you're on the wrong side of the bed
well don't be so harsh on yourself maybe
it's just the wrong side of a time zone
and if you think this is a bad side of a
time zone
check this out between sweden and
finland
there's a small island split down in
half
one is owned by one country and the
other by well
the other there's a one hour difference
between them
which means the island which is slightly
bigger than your backyard
actually has two time zones it's
uninhabited
true but imagine living there and trying
to set up a coffee break with your
friend
if either of you two is a person that's
always late at least
in this case you would have an excuse
that's way better than
oh the bus was late not me
at the same time while a small and
unknown rocky island has two zones
china has only one even though it's
almost as big as the continental united
states
the whole country has one unified time
beijing time when it's 7 am in beijing
it's the same hour for everyone else
even 2 000 miles away
no matter if it's still dark there that
can lead to some serious health issues
and even more hours of lost sleep while
trying to follow the official time
some people end up having their dinner
at actual midnight
schools train stations airports
restaurants
they all have to adjust to the one time
zone which is why schools sometimes have
exams during the night
or restaurants may be open till some
really strange hour
france which is a way smaller country
takes the world's first
when it comes to the number of time
zones it has 12.
that's because france still has
territories spread
all around the world the only ones out
of the game here
are the north and south poles sorry guys
no time zones left for you come back
some other time